Lesson 1: intro to linux, installation of VM and working environment
Ntion on of free software:
free as in beer (ability to get the software for free), free as in speech (not necessarly gratis, include other rights like seeing the code, redistribute,...)

Vagrant used to create virtual environment

Virutal box to launch virtual machines on the physical machine

Linux distribution use:
Red hat: Large entreprise/ Corporate customers
UNbuntu: Ease of use on servers, desktops, laptops
Linux Mint: Desktop users with proproetary media support
Core OS: Clustered, containerized dev of apps

Vagrant command:
vagrant up: to start or restart the VM
vagrant status: to check the VM status
vagrant halt: to shut the VM down forcefully 
vagrant suspend: to suspend the virtual machine

Rem: the VM is an entirely different computer from your physical machine, you can do whatever you want on it with no impact on the PM.

ls -al (a show all stuff in the dirctry included the hidden ones, l to get more info, element starting with d are directory, with - are files)

In Linux all standard user's home directories will be within the /home/ directory. The root user is a special case, it's home directory is in /root/.

The /sbin directory holds all of the applications you may need as an administrator, but normal users typically won't use.

Update your path
http://askubuntu.com/questions/60218/how-to-add-a-directory-to-my-path

Display your path
echo $PATH

To chose a distribution, think to what will be your use.
Red hat for enterprise
Unbuntu for support and community
Debian is unbuntu mother's distribution, it is known as very stable

Lesson 2: Security

A/ Security 101 to do first when setting a sever up.

It is commmon to prevent remote login as root to prevent security problems.
It removes a user name they know exist on this box
-> if not set up then it is the first security pattern to put in place.

The command sudo (super user do) can be used to launch command as a super user from a regular user

Package source list can be found at /etc/apt/sources.list

apt-get is the interface function to a lot of package related functions (man apt-get to see what it can do)

-> Check the software udate list: sudo apt-get update (does not do anything on the system just check the update)
-> To uograde the list: sudo apt-get upgrade (will ask you y/n, when having you roductive server you should test the upgrade on a test environment)

installation of finger
finger user to retrieve info about a user.

Important, most distributon have a "readle" list of its packages. in Ubuntu it's packages.ubuntu.com

Rem packages for Apache http server : Apache2 ; postgre sql postgresq ; mem cach: memcached

Get info about your user: cat /etc/passwd

In linux system, root has always 0 as UID and as GUID

Rem current machine generic IP is  127.0.0.1

hence ro connect with a user ssh user@127.0.0.1 -p 2222 (-p indicates the connection port)

to include sudoers look at  See sudoers(5) for more information on "#include" directives:

Rem to add user in this list add files (using cp to copy old users). The file name does not matter, it is the content

When adding new user for the default pwd to expire immediatly to force the user to reset a new passwd
Command: sudo passwd -e username

B/ Public key authentification

-> User authentication with pwd is not very secure, hackers will try to break it, overloading the server with wrong pwd or breaking it.

To manage connection one use the publc key encription

Public Key encription (https://medium.com/@vrypan/explaining-public-key-cryptography-to-non-geeks-f0994b3c2d5)

Steps summary (detail comes after)



Public Key and Private key must always be generated locally (otherwise you can't claim that the private key staid Private)
In my case on the laptop.

Put the ssh keys in the following folder /Users/NICO/.ssh/ (in Users/UserName/.ssh) and the file name can be whatever you chose.
Then a passphrase is added to prevent someone getting the file to use it to fast.
For me its the question related to the otarie in small letters without punctuation sign.

ssh-keygen genrerates two files, name and name.pub, the file name.pub will be place on the server for the authentification
There are different cryptographique codes.

On the server, in the student (the user) home directory, creates the .ssh directory, this is standard, and then the file authorized_keys that will contains all the authorized public keys.
touch .ssh/authorized_keys

The public key for this remote machine should be copied in authorized_keys

And rights should be added on the server side on folder .ssh (chmod 700) and on file authorized_keys (chmod 644)

Now from the remote machine I can use the -i flag to indicate I want to use a public key:
ssh student@127.0.0.1 -p 2222 -i ~/.ssh/id_rsa_uda

Then disable the pwd based login in /etc/ssh/sshd_config

Then the ssh service needs to be reloaded to take this modif into consideration.
sudo service ssh restart

D/ User management

when running the command ls -al and receiving the following result:
-rw------- 1 student student  506 Oct 14 15:58 .bash_history

In the 10 initial characters 
1: - for file and d for directors
2-4: read write access autorisation for the owner 
5-7: read write access autorisation for the group
8-10: read write access autorisation for everyone

First name = owner
Second name = group

octale: 4 stands for r ; 2 stands for w ; 1 stands for x ; 0 stands for -
hence 7 is rwx ; 6 is rw- ; 5 is r-x ; 4 is r-- ; 1 is --x

this ocatle form are used in the chmod command with three value, for owner, group, evrybody.

command to change file owner or group: chown newOwner file (chgrp) 

E/ port

Default port number:
HTTP: 80 ; HTTPS: 443
SSH: 22
POP3: 110
FTP: 21
SMTP: 25

ufw is the ubuntu firewall, sudo ufw status to check its status
